the memory speed is a lot less important
when it comes to the weather good 100%
fan speed okay change of pace today's
video is going to be how to make a
computer that won't boot boot many of us
are working and learning from home
during these changing times and Micro
Center has what you need to create a
seamless work or learn from home setup
including laptops desktops webcams and
more micro Center has adjusted store
hours as well as limited the capacity of
customers to create a safe shopping
experience but also has many essential
items available via their online store
and for those of you practicing social
distancing but still need to get your
daily dose of tech Micro Center has a
new community forum where you can
discuss and share your favorite tech and
setups including a chance to win a $500
gift card to learn more about how to get
your essential techniques for micro
Center and to visit the community click
the link in the description below I
don't get it all they did was put the
RAM back to stock all right has this
ever happened to you you go to turn on
your computer and it was working
perfectly fine now suddenly you've got
all this crap happening well let's go
ahead and go through the troubleshooting
steps to fix your machine this
particular motherboard the EVGA z3 90
dark has a ninety nine hundred KS
installed we did put the KS in here
right this is the KSR I think I remember
it's got a 900 K maybe s in there this
particular motherboard fortunately has a
surface mounted seat clear CMOS button
it also has one on the back for your
particular motherboard if you don't have
a button that's usually red or black on
the backside or on the surface of your
motherboard that says clear CMOS or just
CMOS then you probably have a jumper
which is two pins that you've got to
touch some metal on or put a little
jumper cap on there refer to your mother
but motherboard manufacturer manual
which you can find online on your phone
or whatever if your computer isn't
booting and find out exactly how to
clear the CMOS that is the first step
what that will do is remove any sort of
overclock any sort of settings that
you've adjusted in your BIOS of your mug
if you've never changed anything I've
heard this a lot too I've never changed
anything my motherboard why my suddenly
blue screening what this also will force
is a retraining of memory so you'd be
surprised
obviously this happened because I
changed something with memory and I
don't think the memory retrained which
hopefully now you could do this with the
CPU and the PC running it's gonna shut
it down hold it for about 10 seconds
usually only need to do like 3 or 4 but
I'm gonna hold it for longer when you
let go it might immediately reboot on
its own not in this case oh it did ok
it's doing the power cycle this may or
may not get us back up and running which
you'll what this is gonna do though and
you need to keep in mind this is going
to remove any fan profiles that you may
have set up inside the BIOS it's gonna
change any sort of like because let's
say is that your boot order if you're
running a motherboard controlled raid
setup it could also potentially undo
that I don't run motherboard raid we use
raid cards and such for just such a
reason but if you started experiencing
problems like this I can't help it wait
from I can't boot - oh we booted a
little now this is also what's nice
about EVGA boards is the fact that they
have a surface mounted speaker that
bring us back to the whole like 286 386
486 days and we're stuck on a six
because I know one of the things that I
did was I played around with the memory
I'm going to now turn off the power
supply hold the power button just for a
few seconds to make sure all the caps
are discharged and we are going to
reseat our memory this is a free step it
doesn't cost any money to try it and
you'd be surprised how many times this
alone the receiving of memory can fix
your problem well that was a satisfying
click so we can get that again mm-hmm
very happy with this social distance
you're maintaining over here every time
I move towards you you're like
yeah let's see now if it will boot into
Windows without a problem then we can
get back to our regularly scheduled
content so because it crashed enough
repair automatic are preparing automatic
repair started and then it crashed I'm
gonna try reading the graphics card cuz
that was the other piece of hardware we
added to this that's probably so creepy
people to watch I don't know we might
have to try a different graphics card
yeah it's crashing right when it tries
to load windows alright so I just threw
on our strict 1660 Ti just another card
I put I put another Nvidia card in here
because the driver same thing bad Drive
bad SATA cable we know it's not the card
we know it's not the RAM I'm gonna
unplug the hard drive oh that's quite
the shirt and Bend on that SATA cable
right there I did let it get really cold
in here and when we were gone for those
three weeks and now suddenly we warmed
it back up one thing believe it or not
that it's worked for me in the past is
switching the SATA ports let's see what
happens not confident but I have had
this happen in the past but because I
know now that it's having a problem when
it hands off to the hard drive and goes
alright run the OS and hard drive just
kind of goes same thing I can't even get
it to go to a safe mode because normally
it would have gotten a safe one on its
own by now I'm gonna flip to a different
BIOS on the motherboard I'm just curious
now if this is a BIOS level problem or a
hardware problem I didn't tell it to
turn on it just turned itself on you saw
that right my heads are right here just
got a - red lights in - no post like
immediately on that BIOS this is why I
keep all my games on a different Drive
because if I have to reinstall the OS we
can get back up for running pretty
quickly
let's try new SATA cable because like I
said this one you guys can't really see
it had
it was like that for the longest time
and I've had SATA cables just go bad I
mean it's what they do
that's why it's pretty awesome to have
all them got two drives hanging around
huh yeah if I have to repair the OS on
this it's gonna go on and I'm about to
make a different phone case I see you
hey it's a it's a razor phone case on an
iPhone what the my test bench was like I
heard you were lacking some content here
let me hand you some something to work
hard I just try the memory all right so
we've got some basic ballistic Ram on
here it'll spin like three times and
then lock up right I'm gonna put in our
install media and see if it can install
because we're making it through all of
our hardware tests I hate installing
windows so one thing that we go I should
say phil has done around here that's
been very helpful is he has kept our
install media as up-to-date as we can
kind of stay on top of I think we're
about one full version plus some updates
behind you don't have to keep using the
vanilla Windows 10 or whatever and then
do the crap ton of updates you can
update your install media which gets you
on the more latest version which a lot
less updates to install eventually we'll
just start doing imaging around here so
when we get a new setup and a new test
bench with this image it that way we can
re image when these problems happen you
know like a real IT expert would do and
I was in charge of doing for a long time
that I hate doing anyway digressing if
we start the installation and it works
then it's just gonna mean that somehow
between the last time we use this rig
was with the painting of the heatsink
where we painted it black that was the
last time we used this and it worked
fine yeah it's totally locked up trying
to do anything past post or working with
Windows at all
and that should be booting off that USB
stick not anything else so we're back to
it being a problem here the next logical
thing for me to do is to update the BIOS
on the motherboard I don't I mean
something could have corrupted with the
BIOS we've been doing lots of
overclocking we've put this thing under
some serious stress it doesn't mean
something couldn't have somehow gotten
corrupted in the BIOS which we can then
fix with the BIOS flash I'm happy that
it's not the drive because I don't want
to start all over again with the Windows
installation I hate doing it as install
so what I think we're gonna have to do
right now is BIOS flash but I mean I
switch to our BIOS and that didn't help
right okay one other thing that I did
recently do was just install this block
back on here
I it it's not something that's common
with Intel but I have to wonder if maybe
I over tighten this slightly which could
have be pushing on the block at an odd
angle or something on the CPU as weird
as it might sound I had him and tried on
plug into keyboard and mouse yeah and
we've had this cheap-ass cord like this
and if there's some sort of a short in
the cord maybe when it initializes the
USB it works inside a BIOS but who knows
in the order of simple possible
solutions we should have started here
with the peripherals I've had you know
I've also had on skunk works because
everyone complained about me saying
peripherals I had a mouse once on skunk
works that would make it take about 45
extra seconds to boot
[Music]
same thing it's rare that I'm stumped
but I'm getting there so we believe that
a lot of the problem is happening when
it hands off to the driver for the
graphics we're gonna switch from an
Nvidia graphics card to an AMD card I'm
running out of ideas quickly here
because the next logical thing that I
would do quite honestly is just switch
the motherboard which I'm starting to
think might end up having to happen I
don't think the board is bad I really
don't but when you're doing process of
elimination you you just have to start
ruling out the variables and the only
thing left is motherboard and CPU at
this point I'm frustrated right now so
what must the average user feel at this
point probably this is the point at
which they get on their phone in the
lake hey Jay I'm having a problem and
it's like I wish I could help with all
those problems but you see how my heart
of time I'm having having access to the
hardware I can't it's very difficult for
me to give you any sort of direction to
aim when I'm not there we just have no
video and it's not doing anything now
that's the next step let's move it to
another slide I'm gonna do it clear CMOS
though right now just for good measure
it's when it's handing off from the post
to the external operating whatever
whether it be the USB stick or the hard
drive or Windows or whatever not that I
think it's gonna matter
I applied an overclock
I reapplied the overclock what we have a
theory we have a theory our theory is
that the KS might need potentially a
little more voltage and so what's
happening is at the BIOS level the
reason why your temperatures are always
higher when you're in the BIOS is
because it kind of pumps more voltage
and more clock speed into the GPU it
ramps it up to its max speed and such
when it hands off to Windows it's then
controlled by the Windows environment
and the intel speedstep and all that
stuff so we think when I was handing off
to Windows it was bringing the voltage
too low it's a really weird theory that
we can't prove but it's so consistent we
think that's what's happening which is
why when I reapplied the manual
overclock to 5 gigahertz I didn't touch
the voltage I left it to auto but what
auto is gonna do is it's gonna use this
kind of a speed slash voltage chart to
say Oh at five gigs we need this much
voltage and since we're sort of locking
it there I think it's giving us the
voltage we need to get into the OS and
work just fine so what we're gonna do
right now is I'm going to now restart
and I'm gonna leave the RAM because the
RAM is also at XMP I put that back so I
changed two things which means now I'm
not sure exactly which one fixed it the
RAM or the CPU what I'm gonna do right
now is I'm gonna put the CPU back to
auto but I'm gonna leave the RAM at the
XMP and see what happens see it's all
working normal now so it's at manual
right now see it's manual 50/50
multiplier 50 Auto and the ring ratio
and 0 on the AVX offset that's what I
did and then on memory I enabled XMP
profile 1 which was one of the things
we're gonna talk about in the original
topic of this video I'll put the OC back
to auto because if we look at the
voltage look at the voltage its pumping
to it right now
1.35 2 volts that's not what it calls
for under its normal conditions nor is
that what a standard
nan KS just a regular Kay calls for so
if I reboot this put the voltage and the
stock multiplier and all that back I
have a suspicion we might crash and if
that's the case I'm hoping a BIOS flash
will fix it oh there it is
so is it Ram all along or did we just
give it basically a digital kick like
the way they started the Millennium
Falcon I want to rename all optimized
defaults right now and just see if it
goes back to the problem default mode
yes it just did it again
it just crashed yeah and the fans ramped
up and it's now locked up I'll do a
clear CMOS then I'll go into the
settings reapply the overclock I did it
did boots so what it needed was the
overclock to boot which means if does
that mean that if somebody built this
system right now they would think they
had bad Hardware because it never would
have booted from the beginning but I
never updated the BIOS on this
motherboard but I'm also the kind of guy
that goes on the first boot goes right
into the BIOS and immediately pushes the
overclock because I know what they can
run so I built think I've ever run this
thing stock alright let's go ahead and
just do the flash tool it's updating our
BIOS right now yeah it's all thought it
worked so here's our theory I probably
overclock the CPU from the moment I
built it because I wanted to do a video
showing you guys what happens when you
try to overclock your ram and how it's
gonna affect performance and graphics
card fps and all that sort of stuff when
you use a high-end graphics card like a
20 atti because there's you know if
you're not if you're not bottom like you
your cpu in anyway you're probably not
gonna see any difference with with Ram
speed it's the first time I reverted it
back to default to try and show you guys
that which is the first time this thing
that ever tried to boot otherwise we
would have probably noticed this six
months ago when we built this test bench
so we went through all the trouble
shooting steps when we could have just
done a BIOS flash at the start
to be fair a BIOS flash is not the first
thing I recommend people do because it
could also be the most damaging thing
you can do if you do it incorrectly and
what I mean by that is your cat or your
dog unplugged your power cable while
it's in the middle of writing and you
have a single BIOS motherboard which
most motherboards or a single BIOS you
don't have a switchable switch like this
to just be up and running with another
BIOS a power failure lightning strike
something you're brown out in the middle
of it's happened plenty of times where
the power has been interrupted if you'd
all have a UPS or whatever that's
keeping your system up and running
during a BIOS flash or if you're
flashing it over USB because it's not
telling you on the screen what progress
it is so you just restart it or pull it
out in the middle of a BIOS flash that's
all problematic so it's never really the
first thing I recommend although EVGA is
windows batch installer thing is pretty
good at doing redundancy checking as
it's going so because we just spent the
last three hours Wow three hours it's
almost one o'clock
Wow Wow
you did all that Wow so because we just
spent the last three hours bringing all
this out we're gonna go ahead and just
make this a video and then we'll go back
to the original video we intended to do
on our next video so thanks for watching
guys that was a simple fix and it turns
out that the BIOS was probably not
supplying enough voltage we're just
funny cuz Phil's theory was like well
you overclock the where you put the
voltage up for the CPU that doesn't know
doesn't help all the system agent
voltage which is gonna be like PCIe
voltage and the VIN voltage in for the
CPU and then he was in the middle of
explaining why he thinks that my my
single fix didn't make a difference and
then it booted he was like well I don't
know
so probably none of this would have
happened if it were a K and not a KS KS
for keeping it stupid alright guys
thanks for watching and we'll see you on
Wednesday
my coffee